This is an ambitious and incredibly impressive project, perfect for showcasing advanced CUDA skills on your RTX 3060. Building a Barnes-Hut (BH) or Fast Multipole Method (FMM) N-body simulator from scratch on the GPU is a significant undertaking, but highly rewarding. Your RTX 3060 Laptop, with its 3840 CUDA cores, is well-suited for this, allowing you to simulate millions of particles.

Let's break down a detailed step-by-step plan focusing on the Barnes-Hut algorithm, as it's generally a more accessible entry point to hierarchical methods than FMM, while still being extremely challenging to parallelize efficiently on the GPU.

Project Title: GPU-Accelerated N-Body Simulation with Parallel Barnes-Hut Algorithm
Goal: Simulate the gravitational interaction of 10 
5
  to 10 
7
  particles using the Barnes-Hut algorithm, entirely on the GPU, with a focus on performance optimization and demonstrating advanced CUDA techniques.

Your GPU: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 Laptop (3840 CUDA Cores) - this is a great target for performance analysis.

Phase 1: Foundation and Brute-Force (Weeks 1-2)
Objective: Set up the development environment, understand basic N-body simulation, and implement a naive (O(N 
2
 )) CUDA version for benchmarking.

Steps:

Environment Setup:

Install NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit: Ensure you have the latest stable version compatible with your drivers. This includes nvcc (CUDA compiler), cuda-gdb (debugger), and profiling tools (nsight compute, nsight systems).

Choose a C++ IDE/Build System: Visual Studio (Windows) with CUDA plugin, or CMake with GCC/Clang (Linux/Windows) are common. CMake is highly recommended for managing CUDA projects.

Basic Project Structure: Create a new C++ project.

Particle Representation & Data Structures (Host & Device):

Define a Particle struct (or class) containing:

float3 position; (x, y, z)

float3 velocity; (vx, vy, vz)

float3 acceleration; (ax, ay, az)

float mass;

(Optional for adaptive timestepping later: float dt; or int timestep_group_id;)

Use std::vector<Particle> on the host.

Allocate device memory using cudaMalloc for Particle arrays. Use cudaMemcpy for host-to-device and device-to-host transfers.

Basic Force Calculation Kernel (Brute-Force O(N 
2
 )):

Kernel calculate_forces_brute_force(Particle* d_particles, int N, float dt, float softening_factor_sq):

Each thread i is responsible for calculating the total force on d_particles[i].

Inside the kernel, thread i loops through all other particles j (from 0 to N-1, skipping i).

Implement Newton's Law of Gravitation:
F 
ij
​
 =G 
∣r 
ij
​
 ∣ 
2
 +ϵ 
2
 
m 
i
​
 m 
j
​
 
​
  
∣r 
ij
​
 ∣
r 
ij
​
 
​
 
where ϵ 
2
  is the softening factor (to prevent infinite forces for zero distance).

Accumulate forces for particle i.

Initial Conditions: Implement functions to generate initial particle distributions (e.g., random in a cube/sphere, a simple galaxy disk, two colliding galaxies).

Integration Kernel update_particles(Particle* d_particles, int N, float dt):

Implement a simple Euler or Velocity Verlet integrator. Each thread updates one particle's velocity and position:
velocity += acceleration * dt;
position += velocity * dt;

Main Simulation Loop (Host-side):

Allocate host memory, initialize particles.

Copy particles to device.

Loop num_timesteps:

Launch calculate_forces_brute_force kernel.

Launch update_particles kernel.

(Optional: Copy results back to host for simple visualization every X timesteps).

Benchmarking and Profiling (Brute-Force):

Measure kernel execution times using cudaEvent_t for different N (e.g., 10k, 20k, 50k, 100k particles).

Use nvprof (older) or nsight compute (recommended) to analyze kernel performance:

Occupancy

Memory bandwidth utilization

Latency vs. Throughput bound

Divergence (though minimal in this simple O(N 
2
 ) loop)

Establish a baseline for "speedup" later. For N>10 
5
 , the O(N 
2
 ) will be too slow for many timesteps.

Phase 2: Barnes-Hut Octree Construction (Weeks 3-6)
Objective: Implement the core Barnes-Hut octree data structure and a parallel method for its construction on the GPU. This is the most challenging part.

Concepts to Master:

Octree Structure: Each node represents a cubic region of space. Internal nodes have 8 children (one for each octant). Leaf nodes contain particles.

Center of Mass (CoM): Each internal node stores the total mass and center of mass of all particles within its region.

Tree Construction Logic: Recursively subdivide cells until a cell contains zero or one particle, or a maximum depth is reached. When a new particle is added to an occupied leaf node, that node becomes an internal node, and its existing particle and the new particle are re-inserted into the newly created children.

Steps:

Octree Node Representation (Device):

Designing this for GPU parallelism is crucial. Avoid pointer-based trees directly, as they are bad for memory locality. Use a flat array representation.

struct OctreeNode {

float3 center_of_mass;

float total_mass;

int first_child_idx; (index into OctreeNode array; -1 if leaf)

int num_children; (0 if leaf, 8 if internal)

float3 bounding_box_min;

float3 bounding_box_max;

int particle_idx; (if leaf, index into Particle array; -1 otherwise)

// Add padding if necessary for memory alignment/coalescing

};

Alternative (More GPU-friendly): A common approach for parallel tree construction is to sort particles by their Z-order (Morton code) curve. This puts spatially close particles close in memory, making parallel construction much easier.

Generate Morton codes for all particles.

Sort particles based on Morton codes (e.g., using Thrust's thrust::sort_by_key).

Build the tree levels by level or in a bottom-up fashion based on the sorted Morton codes. This typically involves parallel prefix sums (thrust::exclusive_scan) and other scan/reduce operations. This is likely the most impressive approach.

Parallel Octree Construction Kernel(s):

Challenges: Building an octree efficiently on the GPU is extremely difficult due to the irregular nature of the tree and pointer chasing. This is where you really stand out.

Option 1 (Difficult but direct): Attempt a fully parallel top-down construction. This involves many kernel launches, atomic operations for node allocation/updates, and careful handling of concurrent insertions into the same node. Not recommended for a first attempt.

Option 2 (Recommended for impressiveness):

Kernel 1: Compute Bounding Box: Find the global bounding box of all particles. (Simple reduction).

Kernel 2: Assign Particles to Initial Octree Cells: For a fixed top level of the octree, assign each particle to its initial cell.

Kernel 3: Generate Morton Codes: For each particle, calculate its 3D Morton code based on its position within the global bounding box.

Kernel 4: Sort Particles by Morton Code: Use thrust::sort_by_key to sort the particle array (and a corresponding array of original indices) based on their Morton codes. This is crucial for locality.

Kernel 5: Build Tree from Sorted Particles (Parallel Algorithm):

This is the hardest part. The idea is to exploit the contiguous nature of sorted Morton codes. Groups of particles with similar Morton codes will belong to the same octree node.

You'll likely need multiple kernels to iteratively build the tree. One approach involves finding the common prefix for adjacent Morton codes to determine parent-child relationships and node boundaries.

This might involve parallel scans/reductions to identify segments of particles belonging to the same node at a given level.

Allocate nodes in a flat array dynamically (or pre-allocate a generous maximum size).

Kernel 6: Compute Node Properties (CoM, Total Mass): Once the tree structure (parent-child relationships, leaf nodes with particles) is established, another set of parallel kernels can compute the center of mass and total mass for all internal nodes in a bottom-up fashion. This can often be done efficiently by processing nodes level by level or using a parallel tree traversal.

Data Structures for Tree Traversal (Device):

Store the constructed OctreeNode objects in a cudaMalloc'd array.

Store particle data in another cudaMalloc'd array, reordered according to the Morton sort.

Phase 3: Parallel Force Calculation and Integration (Weeks 7-9)
Objective: Implement the Barnes-Hut force calculation kernel and integrate it into the simulation loop.

Concepts to Master:

Barnes-Hut Force Calculation: For each particle, traverse the octree. If a node is "far enough" (i.e., the ratio of its size to the distance from the particle is less than a tunable θ parameter), approximate its effect using its center of mass. Otherwise, recursively visit its children.

Condition:  
d
s
​
 <θ, where s is the side length of the node's bounding box and d is the distance from the particle to the node's center of mass.

Thread Divergence: Tree traversal is inherently irregular and can cause significant thread divergence. Strategies to mitigate this are crucial.

Steps:

Barnes-Hut Force Kernel calculate_forces_barnes_hut(Particle* d_particles, OctreeNode* d_octree_nodes, int N, int num_nodes, float theta_sq, float softening_factor_sq):

Each thread i calculates the force on d_particles[i].

Inside the kernel, a thread starts at the root of the octree.

Stack-based Traversal (GPU-friendly): Instead of recursion (which is problematic on GPUs due to limited stack space and potential for divergence), implement an explicit stack (e.g., fixed-size array in shared memory or registers) for each thread to manage its tree traversal.

Force Accumulation: When a node is "far enough" or is a leaf node containing a single particle, calculate the force and add it to the particle's acceleration.

Optimizing Traversal:

Thread Cooperation: Consider if warps can cooperate on parts of the tree, though this is highly advanced. For a first impressive project, focus on optimizing single-thread traversal performance.

Shared Memory: Potentially cache recently accessed nodes in shared memory, but the irregular access patterns make this tricky.

Constant Memory: If tree nodes are read-only and small enough, consider using constant memory for the tree structure for faster access.

Integration Kernel update_particles(Particle* d_particles, int N, float dt): (Re-use from Phase 1)

Main Simulation Loop (Host-side):

Allocate memory.

Generate initial particles.

Loop num_timesteps:

(Re-build Octree): Launch all necessary kernels from Phase 2 to rebuild the octree for the current particle positions. This is the main computational bottleneck for Barnes-Hut per timestep.

Launch calculate_forces_barnes_hut kernel.

Launch update_particles kernel.

(Optional: Copy results back for visualization).

Benchmarking and Profiling (Barnes-Hut):

Measure execution times for each kernel (tree construction, force calculation, integration) for varying N (e.g., 10 
5
 ,10 
6
 ,5×10 
6
 ,10 
7
 ).

Compare total simulation time per timestep against the brute-force version.

Analyze nsight compute reports for the Barnes-Hut kernels. Identify bottlenecks:

Global Memory Bandwidth: Likely a major one, especially for tree traversal.

Thread Divergence: Significant for tree traversal.

Occupancy: How well are you using the GPU's processing units?

Parameter Tuning: Experiment with theta (the accuracy parameter) and discuss its impact on performance and accuracy.

Phase 4: Enhancements and Advanced Features (Weeks 10-12+)
Objective: Add realism, scalability, and further demonstrate expertise.

Adaptive Timestepping:

Concept: Particles that are close to each other or experience strong forces should take smaller timesteps for accuracy, while distant particles can take larger timesteps.

Implementation:

Modify the Particle struct to include an individual dt or a timestep_group_id.

A common approach is to group particles into "active" and "inactive" sets, or into multiple groups, each with its own dt.

During force calculation, determine the appropriate dt for each particle (e.g., based on acceleration, or minimum distance to other particles).

Challenges: This complicates integration. You'll likely need multiple integration kernels, or a more complex single kernel that processes particles based on their dt and advances them by the smallest dt common to all active particles.

This often involves sorting particles by their dt group and processing groups separately.

Interoperability with Visualization (OpenGL/GLFW/GLUT):

Integrate your simulation with a graphics library (e.g., OpenGL via GLFW or GLUT) to visualize the particles in 3D.

Use CUDA-OpenGL interoperability (using cudaGraphicsGLRegisterBuffer, etc.) to directly share particle position data between CUDA and OpenGL, avoiding host-to-device-to-host transfers for rendering. This is a very professional touch.

Realistic Initial Conditions:

Galaxy Disk: Initialize particles in a rotating disk with a central bulge (e.g., using spherical coordinates with appropriate velocity distributions).

Galaxy Collision: Set up two galaxy disks with initial velocities such that they will collide and merge.

Star Cluster: Initialize particles in a gravitationally bound cluster.

Performance Optimization Deep Dive:

Memory Coalescing: Ensure global memory accesses in your kernels are coalesced.

Shared Memory Usage: For force calculation, if possible, load chunks of particle data or octree nodes into shared memory to reuse data and reduce global memory traffic. This is extremely challenging for tree traversal.

Constant Memory: Use __constant__ memory for read-only data accessed by all threads in a warp/block (e.g., global constants, theta).

Texture Memory: For particle data, texture memory can sometimes offer caching benefits, but global memory is usually preferred for direct writes.

Atomic Operations: Minimize their use, especially in performance-critical loops, as they serialize execution.

Stream/Event Management: Use CUDA Streams to overlap kernel execution with data transfers (e.g., preparing the next batch of particles while the current batch is processing forces).

Multi-GPU/Distributed Computing (MPI + CUDA - if applicable):

Requires multiple GPUs: If you have access to a machine with more than one GPU, this is an excellent extension.

Domain Decomposition: Divide the simulation space into sub-domains, with each GPU responsible for particles in its domain.

Ghost Cells/Boundary Exchange: Particles near the boundary of one GPU's domain will influence particles in neighboring domains. Implement MPI communication to exchange "ghost" particle data between GPUs.

Load Balancing: As particles move, the workload on each GPU might become unbalanced. Consider dynamic load balancing strategies.

MPI-CUDA Interop: Use MPI_Send and MPI_Recv (or non-blocking variants) to transfer data between host memory (which CUDA can then access or copy from) or directly between GPU memories using CUDA-aware MPI.

Documentation and Presentation:
GitHub Repository: Host your project on GitHub.

Comprehensive README.md:

Project overview, motivation, and the Barnes-Hut algorithm explanation.

How to build and run the project.

Detailed explanation of your CUDA architecture, kernel design choices, and optimization strategies (e.g., "Why I chose Morton codes," "How I handled divergence").

Performance Analysis Section: Crucial!

Tables and graphs comparing CPU vs. GPU performance (for various N).

Breakdowns of time spent in each kernel (tree build, force calc, integrate).

Discussion of profiling results (occupancy, bandwidth, divergence).

Scalability plots (strong and weak scaling if multi-GPU).

Impact of theta on accuracy and performance.

Screenshots/GIFs/Videos of the simulation in action (especially with visualization).

Code Comments: Well-commented, clean, and readable code.

Project Log: Keep a brief log of your progress, challenges, and solutions.

This project will challenge you, but successfully completing it will demonstrate a truly deep understanding of CUDA, parallel algorithms, hierarchical data structures, and performance optimization, making you stand out significantly in the fields you're targeting. Good luck!